---
layout: post
title:  "Spike field coherence in microelectrode recordings in human epilepsy patients engaged in a visual memory task"
date:   2018-09-30 00:00:00 +0200
categories: research_project
logo_url: /assets/icons/harvardlogo.png
---
I analyzed spike-field-coherence - the synchronization of local field potential and neuronal activity - in brain wide micro-wire recordings in human epilepsy patients undergoing a visual memory task. 

This was my first project during my Masters in Neuroscience for which I spent 8 months in the Kreiman Laboratory at Harvard Medical School in Boston. For the project I ran the full analysis pipeline in MATLAB, ran the code on the Cluster available to the lab, and shared my research with my colleagues from the lab. The scientific report on my work is available [here](/assets/research/MasterProject1Grzelkowski.pdf). Gabriel Kreiman supervised me for the duration of the project. I was also fortunate to attend many of the talks by leading industry and research scientists at the MIT McGovern Institute for Brain Science during my time in Boston.

#### Abstract 
Memory formation is an integral aspect of understanding human cognition. Although previously the hippocampus was indicated as the central hub of memory, in recent years, research has shown that neocortical interactions are also involved. Theta oscillations have been indicated as a possible mechanism for sensory integration, facilitating the formation and recall of memory. In this study, we examined the interaction between spikes and the theta-band (3-8Hz) in the Local Field Potential (LFP), both in the surrounding LFP and in the LFP signal from distant areas, in a Mooney image recognition task in human epilepsy patients with implanted micro-wires. We found that there are few areas that show a difference in Spike Field Coherence (SFC) between novel and recognized Mooney images, for interactions of spikes and the theta band within one recorded channel. However, when examining modulation of firing pattern with theta rhythms of distant regions, we revealed complex interactions in a wide range of cortical areas. Surprisingly, the parahippocampal gyri and the occipital lobe are affected most strongly in a distinction between novel and recognized trials, rather than the hippocampus as previously expected. Our results indicate that a wide range of cortical areas play an important role in memory formation. Furthermore, we provide more evidence for the hypothesis that the theta frequency band provides a mechanism for information transfer between neuronal circuits.